JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Senate Republicans make public
a revised plan to take the place
of Obamacare.
What's inside the bill,
and can it win enough
votes to become law?
Then:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: From a practical
standpoint, most people would
have taken that meeting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President
Trump in France defends
his son's meeting with
a Russian government
lawyer in the hopes of
getting opposition research
on Hillary Clinton.
And our series Inside Putin's
Russia continues with a look
at enemies of the state and how
Russia's leaders
responds to dissent.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA, Open
Russia: I felt just life slowly
going out of the whole body.
And I remember that distinct
feeling that, this is it.
This is the end.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is the
Senate Republican health
care bill version 2.0.
Party leaders made it public
today, but the path to passage
remained anything but clear.
Our Lisa Desjardins
begins our coverage.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader: So, it's
time to rise to the occasion.
LISA DESJARDINS: A
critical moment for
health care and Congress.
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell
unveiled Senate Republicans'
second-draft bill, hoping it
can win the minimum
50 votes he needs.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL: The revised
draft improves on the previous
version in a number of ways,
all while retaining the
fundamental goals of
providing stability and
improving affordability.
LISA DESJARDINS:
What has changed?
First, it keeps two Obamacare
taxes on the wealthy.
Second, it uses that money,
in part, to add more than over
$100 billion in new spending;
$70 billion would go to insurers
to stabilize markets and bring
down out-of-pocket costs,
and $45 billion would
fight the opioid epidemic.
On Medicaid, the bill still cuts
future spending significantly,
but does give states more leeway
to expand who is
eligible for the program.
But perhaps the biggest change
is the addition of a proposal
by Texas Senator Ted Cruz.
The so-called Cruz amendment
would let insurers mostly opt
out of all Affordable Care Act
requirements.
They could potentially
offer cheaper bare-bones
plans, as long as they
offer a few plans that
do meet Obamacare standards.
At the same time,
other Republicans are
crafting their own ideas.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: Well, you know.
We're going to support Mitch's
effort with his new plan,
but we want an alternative,
and we're going to see
which one can get 50 votes.
We're not undercutting Mitch.
He's not undercutting us.
LISA DESJARDINS: Senators
Lindsey Graham of South Carolina
and Bill Cassidy of Louisiana
say their amendment would send
more money directly to states.
It's not clear how
much support that has.
As for Democrats:
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: It appears that
little has changed at the core
of the bill.
LISA DESJARDINS: Minority Leader
Chuck Schumer says Republicans
will still have a problem
getting some key members of
their own party on board.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER: Moderate
Republicans looking at this bill
should be able to see that the
incredibly modest change to
the tax provisions, the small
pot of funding for opioid abuse
treatment, these other tweaks
around the edges are like a
drop in the bucket, compared to
what the bill does to Medicaid,
to seniors, to Americans
with preexisting conditions.
LISA DESJARDINS: All sides
are now waiting for a pivotal
report, the analysis of the
bill by the nonpartisan
Congressional Budget Office.
Especially waiting is Wisconsin
Senator Ron Johnson, a key vote.
SEN.
RON JOHNSON (R), Wisconsin:
Show me your math.
Show me what the
first baseline was.
Show me what the policy
results in terms of spending.
LISA DESJARDINS: Republicans
have not yet announced
when they will hold a vote.
Leaders had hoped for next week.
And of the 52 Senate
Republicans, we already
know that two of them
are no-votes on this
latest draft.
That's Susan Collins of Maine
and Rand Paul of Kentucky.
Judy, of course, that means
Mitch McConnell cannot lose
any more Republicans, and there
are many on the fence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wow.
So, Lisa, thank you.
And, of course, stay here.
We're going to bring in Julie
Rovner, who we know well,
chief correspondent, Washington
correspondent, for Kaiser
Health News, joining us too.
I'm going to start
with you, Julie.
So, there have been some
changes, as Lisa just reported,
to Medicaid, a few, but not
enough to satisfy
these moderates.
What exactly did they do?
JULIE ROVNER, Kaiser
Health News: That's right.
The moderates have been
unhappy with the Medicaid cuts.
Senator Susan Collins, who, as
we just heard, is already a no,
came out and said, the changes
that they would make to
Medicaid go beyond repealing
the Affordable Care Act.
Medicaid was expanded in the
Affordable Care Act, but these
changes would actually cap
the program, something
Republicans have been trying
to do since the 1980s.
It's for the conservatives.
Moderates are still unhappy.
As Lisa pointed out, there
is a little bit more money
to deal with opioid abuse.
They can get out of
the caps if there's a
public health emergency.
But those are pretty
much all the changes
that they have made here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how is
all this going over, Lisa?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
There are a lot of big
question marks on Capitol Hill.
I think that you have got
the same question marks
on the right and the left.
They tried to bring in
moderates, and including
giving them the ability
to increase -- the
states could increase who
can be under Medicaid.
But there's not as much money
to do it, so you would have
to make a choice between the
number of people you could cover
under Medicaid and how much you
would give them in benefits.
It doesn't really address
questions of the overall need
for health care some of these
moderates have.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now,
Julie, we heard in Lisa's
report the reference to
what Senator Ted Cruz
has wanted, has to do with
giving states more options.
Describe exactly
what that involves.
JULIE ROVNER: Well,
Senator Cruz and a number
of the conservatives
in the House too have
complained that one of
the biggest problems
with the Affordable
Care Act is that people
who buy their own insurance are
finding themselves paying much
more, more both in premiums and
in out-of-pocket spending.
And he wants to help people.
But basically the way he would
do it is, he would say, for
healthy people, if you want
to buy fewer benefits,
you can do that, and you
would get less coverage.
And that, in fact, is what
they would do in this bill.
The problem, according to the
insurance industry and a lot of
others who oppose it, is that
it would make coverage for sick
people pretty much unaffordable.
It would leave only sick
people in those plans that
offer all the benefits.
For the people who are lucky
enough to get tax credits, and
they have lowered the threshold,
those people would be mostly
protected from those increases.
But people who are buying their
own insurance and make too much
money to get those tax credits
would bear the brunt of those
very much higher premiums.
So that's a big worry about
how this might play out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, and
the leadership was making
this gesture in Senator Cruz's
direction.
How is it going over?
LISA DESJARDINS: These were
intense negotiations to
put this in the bill today.
But, Judy, if you actually read
the bill online, the entire
Cruz amendment is in brackets.
Literally, it is in brackets.
And Republican leadership
confirmed that means
it's not final.
It could still be taken out.
It could still be revised.
And one other tricky piece of
choreography with all of this,
multiple sources have told
me that they are going to get a
score from not CBO -- just from
CBO, but also the Department
of Health and Human Services.
which is a very
unusual step on this.
They are going to see what
the Department of Health and
Human Services think the Cruz
amendment will mean.
And all of this is kind
of adding new questions
to the process as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Presumably
not knowing what the
department is going to say.
Is that right?
Or do they assume the department
is going to come in and
say this is a good thing?
LISA DESJARDINS:
That, we don't know.
We know there have
been conversations
for weeks with CBO.
CBO has known the general
outlines of these bills.
Have they had those
conversations with HHS as well?
I don't know.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa, I
want to stay with you.
You have been following this
day after day after day since
the Senate went home for recess.
They have now come back.
What is the political calculus
on the part of the Republican
leadership in the Senate?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think it
comes down to one fact, that
they feel they campaigned on
this and that they have to at
least give it their greatest
try or have to show themselves
as trying as hard as possible.
Right now, it does look like
it's going to be very difficult
to get the votes for this
to pass, but it also looks
like they will hold that vote,
even if it fails, to show
their voters, we tried and
this is as far as we could get.
I think there is pressure from
both conservatives an moderates
to go both different directions.
And that's what making
this goal of reforming and
replacing Obamacare impossible.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Julie -- excuse me.
Julie, you have done your
own share of reporting
on this for a long time.
What are you seeing
as to where this goes?
JULIE ROVNER: I see exactly
what Lisa said, that they're
caught between this promise that
they made to repeal and replace
the Affordable Care Act and
their ability to do it, which
is difficult to find consensus
within their own conference.
So, I think they're going
to sort of run out the
string as much as they can.
The bigger problem is, even if
they get something through the
Senate, then it will have to go
back to the House.
So whether you could actually
get something through both
chambers in any kind of timely
way remains a big open question.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then we
heard, Lisa, the president
saying that he would be angry if
the Senate doesn't
get this done.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
And to be honest, sources I talk
to, Republicans, aren't sure the
president has helped-, because
as much as he's behind
the scenes sometimes
encouraged them, when
he's gone and criticized
the House bill later on, for
example, as being mean, they're
worried that if they join forces
with him, that later he might
say something different.
I think, overall, it's
important to just remember the
broad contours of this bill.
There are a lot of
details, a lot of changes.
But as much as it deals with
the Affordable Care Act, this
bill in its heart is also a
Medicaid reform bill.
That was something they
didn't have to add to
this, but they did.
And in doing that, they lost
a lot of moderate votes.
They're keeping with
that because Republicans
feel like it's important,
but that was a big
gamble that they took
in actually putting two
bills together here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, my
producer is trying to tell
me something about senators.
Maybe there is new
some information?
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: ...
watch, particularly.
LISA DESJARDINS: I
think that's right.
We need to watch a lot of
key senators this week.
Let's look at five very quickly.
That's Ron Johnson of Wisconsin.
We talked to him today.
Mike Lee of Utah, he's not
happy with the Cruz amendment
as written, even though was
one of its authors
at the beginning.
Shelley Moore Capito
of West Virginia.
Dean Heller of Nevada,
he's interesting.
His governor today said
he has great concerns
about the bill as it is.
And, of course, Lisa Murkowski
of Alaska, she had said she
didn't like where this is
going.
And we're waiting to hear
from all five of those.
They can't lose
any one of those.
And that's just the beginning
lineup of questions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I know the two of
you are going to keep monitoring
it every minute of every
day until we know
what the answer is.
Lisa Desjardins, Julie
Rovner, thank you both.
JULIE ROVNER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the day's
other news: President Trump
held talks in Paris with the
president of France, but he
faced questions about his son's
meeting with a Russian lawyer
last summer aimed at
getting information
harmful to Hillary Clinton.
At a joint news conference, Mr.
Trump dismissed criticism of
the meeting, and said -- quote
- - "It's called
opposition research."
We will have a full report
after the news summary.
In China, political dissident
and Nobel Peace Prize winner
Liu Xiaobo died today of liver
cancer.
He had been released
from a state prison last
month and hospitalized,
but was barred from
going abroad for treatment.
Liu was one of the Chinese
government's most vocal
opponents, and spent
decades campaigning
for greater human rights.
He was imprisoned in
2009 for subversion.
His death drew widespread
criticism of Beijing.
SALIL SHETTY, Secretary-General,
Amnesty International: I
think it's outrageous for
the Chinese government
to weave the fiction that
Liu Xiaobo was a criminal.
It's very clear that, thanks
to Liu Xiaobo, millions of
people, not just in China, but
across the world, have been
inspired to stand up for freedom
and justice in the face of
oppression.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S. Secretary
of State Rex Tillerson urged
China to release Liu's wife,
who is under house arrest.
And the White House said
President Trump was deeply
saddened by the news.
Liu Xiaobo was 61 years old.
Former President Jimmy
Carter was hospitalized for
dehydration today in Canada.
Mr. Carter is 92.
Habitat for Humanity said he
had been working in the sun
building homes for the needy in
Winnipeg, Manitoba.
The organization said the
former president told them he
is OK, and he urged the crew
to keep building.
The number-three Republican in
the U.S. House, Steve Scalise,
has had another round of surgery
after being shot last month.
The Louisiana Republican
was seriously wounded
when a gunman attacked
a congressional baseball
practice.
Hospital officials in
Washington say the latest
surgery was to treat infection.
The U.S. Justice Department
today has charged more than 400
people with opioid scams and
health care fraud.
The alleged schemes totaled
$1.3 billion in false billing.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions
called it the largest health
care fraud takedown operation
in American history.
Six teenage girls from
Afghanistan will be allowed into
the U.S., after all, to take
part in a robotics competition.
The team had twice been denied
visas, but the White House
says President Trump intervened
to reverse that decision.
Today, the girls flew to the
capital city of Kabul from
Western Afghanistan to get their
travel documents.
They said they are excited
to finally be on the way.
FATEMAH QADERYAN, Robotics
Competitor (through translator):
We were disappointed when the
Americans made a difference
between Afghanistan
and other countries on
not issuing visas to
us.
At that time, we lost hope
and we were feeling sad.
But now we are very
happy that they have
given us a chance to go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S. officials
have not said why the team
was previously denied entry.
Afghanistan is not one
of the countries on the
president's travel ban list.
In Washington, the Congressional
Budget Office said today that
the president's budget and
spending plan for the coming
year falls far short of what
the White House promised.
Instead of creating a small
surplus, the CBO reports that
there would still be a deficit
of some $720 billion
at the end of 10 years.
It says the budget
proposal relies on economic
growth projections that
are far too optimistic.
Democrats and Republicans in
Congress have reached initial
agreement on expanding college
aid for veterans.
It aims to fill coverage
gaps in benefits that
were enacted after 9/11.
The new proposal would lift a
15-year time limit for vets to
tap into education benefits.
It also adds more money for
thousands of members of the
National Guard and Reserve.
The trustees of the U.S.
government trust fund that
pays Medicare bills say that it
will go broke in 2029.
And that is one year later
than last year's forecast.
They also estimated that
Social Security will
be depleted by 2034.
That is the same as
last year's prediction.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
21 points to close at 21553.
The Nasdaq rose 13, and
the S&P 500 added four.
And American tennis player
Venus Williams is now the oldest
player to reach a Wimbledon
final in more than 20 years.
In the semifinals today,
Williams, at the age of 37, made
quick work today of Britain's
Johanna Konta, who's 26.
On Saturday, Williams
goes for her sixth
Wimbledon championship.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Trump abroad - - questions
about his son's meeting with
a Russian lawyer follow
the president to Paris;
Inside Putin's Russia,
a look at the fate
of those who stand up
to Vladimir Putin; the
wisdom of finance --
what Hollywood and Jane
Austen can teach us about
economic risk; and much more.
President Trump arrived in Paris
today for talks with French
President Emmanuel Macron,
with the aim of strengthening
the alliance between
the two countries.
But the visit was at least
partly overshadowed by questions
that continues to dog President
Trump, whether his presidential
campaign coordinated with
the Russian government.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: Even amid
the splendor of Paris,
President Trump could
not escape the firestorm
over his son's meeting
with a Russian lawyer.
At a news conference with French
President Emmanuel Macron,
Mr. Trump defended Donald
Trump Jr. as a wonderful young
man who did nothing wrong.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: I think, from
a practical standpoint, most
people would have
taken that meeting.
It's called opposition
research, or even research
into your opponent.
I have had many people -- I
have only been in politics
for two years, but I have had
many people call up, oh, gee, we
have information on this factor
or this person or, frankly,
Hillary.
That's very standard
in politics.
JOHN YANG: The president said
the Russian lawyer, Natalia
Veselnitskaya, had visited
Congress and he suggested her
U.S. visa had been approved by
Obama Attorney General Loretta
Lynch, not the State Department.
Late today, Lynch said she
had nothing to do with it.
On Air Force One on the way to
Paris, Mr. Trump told reporters
that the Russia investigation
was only helping him.
"It's making Trump stronger,
because my people and
the people that support
me, who are incredible
people, those people are angry
because they feel it's being
unfair and a witch-hunt."
At the news conference, a French
reporter asked the president
about his often-repeated
campaign anecdote about a friend
who had told Mr. Trump that
the threat of Islamic terrorism
had ruined Paris.
DONALD TRUMP: I see
him like a month ago.
How was Paris this summer?
What?
I don't go to Paris.
Are you kidding me?
It's no longer Paris.
JOHN YANG: Today, he turned
it around to flatter his host.
DONALD TRUMP: You know what?
It's going to be just
fine, because you have
a great president.
You have somebody who's going
to run this country right.
So, I really have a feeling that
you're going have a very, very
peaceful and beautiful Paris.
And I'm coming back.
You better do a
good job, please.
Otherwise, you're going
to make me look very bad.
JOHN YANG: The two leaders
said they discussed Syria and
the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Macron said Mr. Trump's
decision to withdraw
from the Paris climate
accord wouldn't affect
their relationship.
Bloomberg News White House
correspondent Toluse Olorunnipa
is covering the trip.
TOLUSE OLORUNNIPA, Bloomberg
News: They see the world in
very different ways, but they
have come to realize that
they can benefit from having a
positive relationship with one
another, and that's what
we saw on display today.
JOHN YANG: Indeed, the
body language today
was a marked difference
from their first awkward
encounter in May, and
was capped tonight with
dinner at the Eiffel Tower.
After watching Bastille Day
celebrations in Paris tomorrow,
Mr. Trump heads back to the
United States, and more
repercussions from his
son's Russia meeting.
Senate Judiciary Committee
Chairman Chuck Grassley said
he wants Donald Trump Jr. to
testify in open session
as soon as next week.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we just heard,
the president defended his older
son's meeting with a Russian
lawyer last year, saying
that it was standard
opposition research.
But some have
questioned that premise.
To discuss all this,
we are joined now by
two campaign veterans.
Tim Miller was the former
communications director for Jeb
Bush's presidential campaign.
He is also co-founder of
the Republican opposition
research group America Rising.
And Christina Reynolds, she
was the deputy communications
director for Hillary Clinton's
2016 presidential campaign,
and she's now the senior vice
president for Global Strategy
Group, a Democratic
research firm.
And we welcome both of
you to the "NewsHour."
Christina, I'm going
to start with you.
Tell our audience, what
is opposition research?
CHRISTINA REYNOLDS, Former
Hillary Clinton Campaign Deputy
Communications Director: Well,
when I started, we used to call
it quotes, votes and anecdotes.
It is gathering public
information to tell a
story about your opponent.
So, we look at public sources.
We look at everything from
votes to tax records to personal
stories that you can find out
about someone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tim Miller,
what would you add to that?
TIM MILLER, Former Jeb Bush
Campaign Communications
Director: I think that's right.
I call it full
information awareness.
You want to know everything
you can about your opponent,
everything they have ever said,
any way they have ever made
money, any way they have ever
spent money, and so that you
can use it to your advantage
in the campaign and so voters
know their entire record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Christina
Reynolds, is it anything goes?
Anything about their medical
records, their personal life?
CHRISTINA REYNOLDS: No.
I mean, first and foremost,
you have to -- we used to have
a rule that said, if you can
cite it, you can write it.
You need a publicly
available source for
something to be credible
in the news, for something
to be credible in ads.
And, second of all, if you
go into things like medical
records and things like that,
then you start getting into
worrying about blowback
for your own candidate.
So, it's not anything goes.
You have to be careful.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
do you mean blowback?
CHRISTINA REYNOLDS: I mean,
at some point, there's a risk
that the actual gathering of
the information may be
considered worse then
the public -- than
the information that's
found, if it's considered
dirty tricks, so to speak.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tim Miller,
are there lines drawn around
what's considered acceptable
opposition research or not?
TIM MILLER: Of course there are.
We started an opposition
research firm America Rising
that has been very successful.
And -- but what try to do is
ensure that we stay inside
these lines, both legal lines
and ethical -- and
ethical boundaries.
And I think both of those are
in play here with regards to
the president's son's meeting.
It's like Christina said.
You saw this with the Ted Cruz
campaign in Iowa, that they
had blowback when they were
spreading information that Ben
Carson was going to drop out
of the race, when that wasn't
true.
You have to be careful that
your opposition research is
correct, first and foremost, but
also within legal
and ethical bounds.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's what I
want to pursue with both of you.
What is inside and what
is outside the bounds
of what you can do?
And, of course, we're asking
you all this because of what
happened with regard to Donald
Trump Jr., the meeting
he took with a Russian
- - representative of
the Russian government.
CHRISTINA REYNOLDS: Sure.
Well, I can tell you, in
my experience in research,
what he did is not normal.
I think that what's inside
the bounds is things that
are publicly available.
You do a lot of Freedom
of Information Act
records requests.
You certainly talk to people,
but you do so with people that
you know and trust are giving
you solid information
and information that you
can then go and prove.
And you certainly don't
do something with a
hostile government,
you know, being on your
side.
You know, the best example of
this is when Al Gore's campaign
got a debate book FedExed
to them, a George
Bush debate book.
The first thing they did was
call the FBI, because you
wonder, are you being set up?
You wonder, is this something
that's valid, that's real?
That's something that you
don't take every meeting.
People call with tips.
You make sure that you
trust the veracity of the
information and the source.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tim Miller, had
you ever, before this instance,
heard of a time when someone
was offered information by a
foreign hostile government?
TIM MILLER: Well, I will tell
you, almost to the question,
I -- like President Trump,
have been called by anonymous
people, friends of friends with
information about him, frankly,
and about Hillary Clinton when
I was working for Jeb Bush.
And you have to make a
decision about whether
this is a credible person.
You have to talk to lawyers
to make sure, if you have
the conversation, it's within
legal bounds.
Now, those conversations,
while maybe some would consider
to be a little bit sketchy,
pale in comparison to the idea
of getting a call from somebody
who explicitly says they're
here from the
Russian government.
This is not just a
foreign government, Judy.
It wasn't Switzerland who
had called Donald Trump Jr.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
TIM MILLER: It was a
country that is out there
to undermine our interests
on the world stage.
It's so far beyond the pale,
that it's kind of almost silly
to compare it to some of these
other gray area opposition
research efforts, because
there is nothing gray about it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christina, were
you ever aware of being offered
or hear of anybody in a campaign
being offered something
from a foreign hostile...
CHRISTINA REYNOLDS: From
a foreign government?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
CHRISTINA REYNOLDS:
That's an easy answer: No.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so, when
a question arises about what
you're -- whether you're being
offered or what someone's trying
to tell you, if there is any
question about it, what do
you do?
CHRISTINA REYNOLDS: I think,
as Tim mentioned, sometimes,
you talk to lawyers.
You think about, will I be
able to give this to a reporter
and know that it's true?
Would I have my candidate
say it out loud and
feel confident in that?
You think through those
things, and I think you
set a really high bar.
If we learned anything from the
Donald Trump's election, from
the past campaign and Trump's
election, it's that no one
story can kill a campaign, but
you don't want to be the one
that is -- you know, that is
seen as playing dirty tricks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are people
-- I know every campaign is
different, Tim Miller, in the
way it's organized, the
hierarchy and so forth.
But are there rules that are
shared, that are known by people
in modern American politics
about what's OK and what isn't?
You just count on
the lawyers you hire?
And I know every campaign
has lawyers to tell you
that, or how does that work?
TIM MILLER: Yes, look, I
think that there are norms
within opposition research.
We also run a candidate
tracking organization.
It's the guys that -- and gals
that follow around candidates
with a video camera to get
whatever they say on the record.
And there are rules.
We work with a Democratic
opposition research firm,
you know, and we would
have an off-the-record
conversation to kind of set
boundaries, you know, that we
weren't going to go videotape
their family dinner, right?
You're not going to go
dumpster-diving in there in the
trash can outside their house.
Like I said, there are going to
be areas where there are some
-- where there are gray areas.
Opposition research is not
all just fun and games.
It's serious business,
especially running
for high office.
But there are legal lines and
then there are also just decency
boundaries, you know, like
the example I mentioned
about the family.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right, but even
if -- Christina, even if the
campaign says, we're not going
to do this, there are other
tabloids and others out there
who may be engaging in this kind
of research.
CHRISTINA REYNOLDS: Sure.
And I think one thing -- Tim
will probably back me up on
this -- one thing that is true
of all researchers
is, we all see black
helicopters a little bit.
We are all just a
little bit paranoid.
And you worry about a setup.
You worry that just the
giving of that information
may be more interesting
news than the information
itself.
And so you use your best
judgment, as Tim mentioned.
You know, you use your lawyers
and you use your best judgment,
and you make sure that
you don't do anything that's
going to damage the campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Experience counts.
TIM MILLER: You go back
to that '08 campaign
with Hillary Clinton and
Obama, Hillary Clinton's
oppo research on Obama, I think
-- Christina would know better
-- backfired more than it
helped, because people didn't
want there to be, within a
family, intraparty squabbles
that were that personal.
And so you have to be
careful about that.
There are electoral implications
to consider, in addition to
the legal and ethical ones.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it is --
it's a subject that doesn't
get a lot of attention, but,
right now, everybody
is asking questions.
Tim Miller, Christina
Reynolds, we thank you both.
CHRISTINA REYNOLDS: Thank you.
TIM MILLER: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return to our
series Inside Putin's Russia
-- tonight, the fate of some
of the Kremlin's opponents.
According to one study, in the
past three years, 38 prominent
Russians have been murdered
or died suspiciously.
The high mortality rate
among some Russian critics
has a long history.
But critics say it is emblematic
of how President Vladimir
Putin runs today's Russia.
Special correspondent Nick
Schifrin and producer Zach
Fannin report from Moscow.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In today's
Russia, there are consequences
to criticizing the state.
Police tell protesters their
rally isn't sanctioned.
They are asking President
Vladimir Putin not to
run for reelection.
This demonstration is
sponsored by the opposition
group Open Russia.
In Saint Petersburg, and across
the country, police arrested
more than 100 protesters.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA, Open
Russia: These democratic
opposition activists
are being arrested and
given lengthy prison sentences.
It is members of the democratic
opposition who are being
forced into exile, or harassed,
or attacked, or murdered.
NICK SCHIFRIN:
Thirty-five--year-old
Vladimir Kara-Murza is Open
Russia's vice chairman.
He is an outspoken activist,
demonstrating against Putin
and organizing protests.
We first sat down with
him late last year.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: We
believe in the rule of law.
We believe in human rights.
We believe that Russia
should enjoy the same
democratic institutions
that the rest of Europe
enjoys.
NICK SCHIFRIN: To try and create
those democratic institutions,
he teamed up with the man he
calls his mentor, Boris Nemtsov,
a former deputy prime minister
who became the country's
leading dissident.
The two traveled to Washington
to highlight the mysterious
death of Sergei Magnitsky,
a lawyer who exposed corruption
among senior officials.
Nemtsov and Kara-Murza
convinced the U.S. Congress to
freeze the assets of Russians
believed connected
to Magnitsky's death.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA:
These people in the
current Russian regime who
rule like to keep their
money, their assets in the West.
They want to
vacation in the West.
They send their kids
to schools to the West.
And this personal accountability
may well be the only thing
that will make them think
twice.
NICK SCHIFRIN: A little more
than two years later, Nemtsov
was assassinated a few hundred
feet from the Kremlin's walls.
His death was
brazen and shocking.
This is the spot where
Boris Nemtsov was killed.
And you can see the corner of
the Kremlin, right there, just
a few hundreds yards away,
and you can see the memorial
for him that's on this bridge.
Today in Moscow, a court
sentenced five people
in Nemtsov's murder.
Whether or not they were the
masterminds, they permanently
silenced Nemtsov's outspoken
criticism.
Kara-Murza believes someone
used poison to silence him too.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: And I
started suddenly feeling really,
really sick, and within a
space of 15 to 20 minutes, I
went from feeling completely
normal, like I am now, to having
a really rapid heart rate,
sweating, palpitation.
I started vomiting, and then
I just lost consciousness.
Kidneys, I think went first.
Then it was the heart,
the lungs, the stomach,
the liver, everything.
Everything just shut down.
So I have no doubt that
this was a deliberate
attempt to murder, based
on my political activities,
motivated by my activities
in the Russian opposition.
NICK SCHIFRIN: There are
people who are working as
opposition who are not targeted.
What is the line that
you apparently crossed?
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: There's
the clear line between just
saying things that are against
the regime, and it's a totally
different thing to go after
their own personal interests,
after their pockets.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The history of
assassination goes back decades.
In 1940, Leon Trotsky was
killed with an ice axe.
In 2006, crusading
Russian journalist Anna
Politkovskaya was murdered.
And in 2014, Alexander
Litvinenko, a former
intelligence agent who
accused Putin of ordering
Politkovskaya's death, was
killed by radioactive tea.
Denis Voronenkov was a pro-Putin
lawmaker who defected to
Ukraine and became a Putin
critic.
In March, he was walking down
the street in Kiev when a
gunman shot him three times.
His body bled out on
the sidewalk in the
middle of the day.
Maria Maksakova is his widow.
MARIA MAKSAKOVA, Widow of Denis
Voronenkov: I was dreaming
about my first spring in Kiev
with Denis.
I was dreaming so desperately.
At first, I thought it's better
not to be born at all when
you lose something like that.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Maksakova
lives in Kiev, where she
is raising their son.
In Moscow, she and Voronenkov
were both lawmakers
allied with Putin, and
they enjoyed the spoils
that come from power.
But he'd also been an
investigator who uncovered
corruption in the Russian
intelligence agency,
the FSB.
Who do you think
killed your husband?
MARIA MAKSAKOVA: He
had certain enemies.
And these enemies
are in the FSB.
The anti-corruption teams that
he would investigate from here,
that is loss of money and loss
of influence, loss of
everything, positions.
And that was something that
they would not let him do.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Russia calls
her claim a fabrication.
But his death fits a pattern.
A once-loyal family member
becomes an outspoken
opponent and ends up dead.
MASHA GESSEN, Author/Activist:
A mafia family, you can be born
into, you can be adopted into
it.
You can't leave it voluntarily.
People who have tried to leave
the Putin family voluntarily
have not fared very well.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Masha Gessen is a
Russian journalist, author, and
prolific anti-Putin activist.
You have been dubbed by
some an enemy of the state.
Are you an enemy of the state?
MASHA GESSEN: Well, I
am certainly an enemy
of the mafia state.
Absolutely, yes.
I'm not an enemy of
the Russian state.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Gessen
was the first journalist
blacklisted by Putin's Kremlin.
She's also been targeted
because she's a lesbian who's
raising adopted children.
WOMAN (through translator):
He was born by a woman I don't
know and first met when he
was 2.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In 2013,
she helped lead a video
campaign criticizing
an anti-gay propaganda
law.
It helped condone homophobia
and attacks on gay Russians, and
Gessen argues the law explains
how Putin rules.
MASHA GESSEN: The autocrat
needs everybody out in the
street with flags aloft.
That is primarily the
need for mobilization.
To have mobilization,
you need to have enemies.
You can have LGBT people as
enemies today, and then you
can have Americans tomorrow,
and keep the LGBT people in
your back pocket and then pull
them out when you need them
again.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And Gessen says
above it all is a boss served
by loyal lieutenants, who
don't need explicit
instructions to launch attacks.
MASHA GESSEN: The patriarch
of the family will say, do I
always have to tell you what
to do?
Like, don't you know what
the right thing to do is?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Does the Kremlin
kill its political enemies?
SERGEY MARKOV, Russian
National Strategic Council:
One hundred percent sure not.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The Kremlin
declined our interview request.
But Sergey Markov, a
member of Putin's party
and Russia's National
Strategic Council, reflects
the Kremlin's defense,
counterpunch and embrace
conspiracy theories, starting
with the assassinated
opposition leader Boris Nemtsov.
SERGEY MARKOV: Who
organized his killing?
I strongly believe that it's
terrorist organization SBU,
intelligence service of Ukraine.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Ukraine
killed Boris Nemtsov?
SERGEY MARKOV: Not Ukraine.
Ukraine is country run by
terrorists, but terrorists who
captured Ukraine, they killed
Boris Nemtsov.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But
it's more than Nemtsov.
Right?
Vladimir Kara-Murza has
been poisoned twice.
Anna Politkovskaya was killed.
There are a lot of people
who have criticized the
Kremlin who end up dead.
SERGEY MARKOV: First
of all, not too much.
This atmosphere of
killing people exists,
but this atmosphere
had been created not by
Vladimir Putin, but by Western
countries against Russia.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For the people
Putin targets, that argument
is an attempt to distract.
MIKHAIL KASYANOV, Former
Russian Prime Minister:
Russia surrounded by enemies.
We should support even
stronger than before our
leader, et cetera, et cetera.
This is standard propaganda
for any authoritarian regime.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Mikhail
Kasyanov was Putin's
first prime minister.
In the early 2000s, the two
worked together to pass much
needed economic reforms.
In 2004, Putin fired him, and
Kasyanov became an outspoken
opposition politician, appearing
alongside Boris Nemtsov
and Vladimir Kara-Murza.
Last year, a prominent Putin
ally posted a video of him
and Kara-Murza in crosshairs.
But not all of the Kremlin's
enemies end up dead.
Some end up humiliated.
How did they target you?
MIKHAIL KASYANOV: On television.
They're blackmailing me and
just creating dirty stories,
et cetera, et cetera.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Five
months before 2015
elections, state television
broadcast Kasyanov having
sex with his assistant.
The video helped
fracture his party.
MIKHAIL KASYANOV: They will
try to destroy publicly, to
destroy morally and reputation
of all of us.
And they're doing this
quite successfully.
And they will
continue doing this.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And
is there anything you
can do to stop them?
MIKHAIL KASYANOV: We
cannot do anything because
we have no protection.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: We have
no free and fair elections.
We have censorship in the media.
We have political prisoners,
more than 100 political
prisoners now in Russia, today.
NICK SCHIFRIN: One year after
he nearly died from poisoning,
Kara-Murza got better, and
restarted his work.
In February, he was a few
hours away from boarding a
plane to Washington, where his
family lives for their
safety, when he says he
was poisoned a second time.
We sat down with him and
his wife, Evgenia, in march.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA:
And I couldn't breathe.
And at this stage, when you
are lying there, trying to gasp
for air, you know, I felt just
life slowly going out
of the whole body.
And I remember that distinct
feeling that, this is it.
This is the end.
Now I'm going to die.
The only thing I was able to
do, I called my wife, Evgenia,
who was here in the United
States.
EVGENIA KARA-MURZA, Wife
of Vladimir Kara-Murza:
I asked them to take
him to the hospital,
to the same medical team
that had treated him in 2015.
Had he been on the plane, had
he been alone in his apartment,
had he been somewhere with
- - I don't know, in the streets
of Moscow - - oh, my God.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Kara-Murza
had noticed that, almost
every night, Moscow
city workers removed
Boris Nemtsov's memorial.
So he made a film to protect
his mentor's career and life.
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: That
film was the most difficult
thing I ever did in my life.
The film is about the portrait
of a man who could, if not
for a quirk of fate, very well
become the president of Russia.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Do you miss him?
VLADIMIR KARA-MURZA: There
are no words to describe
how much I miss him.
Sorry.
EVGENIA KARA-MURZA: The risks,
they do hit close to home,
closer and closer every time.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Have you ever
asked him not to go back?
EVGENIA KARA-MURZA:
It is terrifying.
I'm not going to lie to you.
But I want him to continue to
do what he thinks is important,
what he thinks is right.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And her
faith allows Kara-Murza
to keep his faith that
he can change the system.
He says, after recovering, he
will go back to Russia to finish
the work that he and Nemtsov
started.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Nick Schifrin in Moscow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And our week-long
series Inside Putin's Russia
continues tomorrow with a look
at the relationship between
Russia and the United States.
When it comes to Wall Street,
many people think of money
and greed, but a professor
at Harvard Business School
argues there's a lot more to
the world of finance, and he
uses books and movies
to make his case.
Our economics correspondent
Paul Solman has the story.
It's part of our series
Making Sense, which
airs every Thursday.
ACTORS: One, two, three!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: The field
of finance, you might say
it has an image problem.
Consider "The Wolf of
Wall Street," based on
a real-life character.
LEONARDO DICAPRIO, Actor:
If anybody here thinks I'm
superficial or materialistic, go
get a job at McDonald's,
because that's where you
(EXPLETIVE DELETED) belong.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: Investment banker
Patrick Bateman in "American
Psycho" is fictional, but not
entirely implausible.
CHRISTIAN BALE, Actor: I
have all the characteristics
of a human being, flesh,
blood, skin, hair,
but not a single clear,
identifiable emotion, except
for greed and disgust.
MICHAEL DOUGLAS, Actor: I am
not a destroyer of companies.
PAUL SOLMAN: Hey, finance has
had an image problem since
buyout bro Gordon Gekko graced
the silver screen 30 years ago.
MICHAEL DOUGLAS: The point
is, ladies and gentlemen that
greed, for lack of a better
word, is good.
ACTOR: Big bank, small
bank, I like to make money.
All right?
PAUL SOLMAN: And the real
events of the 2008 financial
crisis only made matters worse.
ACTOR: That's America's
housing market.
PAUL SOLMAN: But Harvard
Business School's Mihir
Desai says there are
two faces to finance,
though he readily acknowledges
the dark one to his students.
MD+IMD-I MIHIR DESAI,
Harvard Business School: Many
people demonize what you do,
and it's hard to live that way.
PAUL SOLMAN: And he
told me he gets why that
perception is so pervasive.
MIHIR DESAI: When you have
real-life figures like Martin
Shkreli, who was both a hedge
fund trader and then took over
a pharmaceutical company, jacked
up prices by 5000 percent,
subsequently engaged in
a variety of nefarious
behavior, and very
proudly so, so it almost
makes you feel like real
life is outpacing fiction.
PAUL SOLMAN: Desai has
written a book to try
to balance the picture,
"The Wisdom of Finance."
MIHIR DESAI: The goal in the
book is to try to demystify
finance so that the people who
currently demonize it will
come to understand it, as
opposed to simply oppose it.
And then for the people
who are in finance, we have
to get back to the ideas.
The ideas matter.
PAUL SOLMAN: To Professor
Desai, the big idea of finance
is illustrated by the Quincunx
machine in Boston's Museum of
Science: the ability to find
order in a seemingly random,
and therefore
risk-forsaken, world.
MIHIR DESAI: This was a real
revolution in probability,
which is random things happening
results in predictable patterns.
PAUL SOLMAN: Balls drop,
bounce randomly left or
right as they encounter
the pins, and eventually
hit bottom to form
a bell-shaped curve.
MIHIR DESAI: Things that seem
random actually end up resulting
in a very orderly pattern,
in fact, this bell-shaped
distribution or
normal distribution.
And that, of course, is the
foundation of finance, because
you observe a lot of random
things, but it ends up
behaving in predictable ways.
PAUL SOLMAN: Randomness and
its risks are everywhere.
Finance's job, to
try to manage them.
Case in point?
The income plight of women
throughout most of history.
ACTOR: You should consider
that it is by no means certain
that another offer of marriage
may ever be made to you.
MIHIR DESAI: Mr. Collins, who
delivers the worst proposal
ever to Lizzy Bennet in "Pride
and Prejudice."
ACTOR: I am well aware that
1,000 pounds is all you may
ever be entitled to, but rest
assured I shall never
reproach on that score
when we are married.
MIHIR DESAI: You're not that
wealthy, you're not that
pretty, you have an offer on the
table today from me.
You would better take it.
PAUL SOLMAN: It's the great
economic risk faced by all
Jane Austen's Bennet girls, but
says Desai:
MIHIR DESAI: Lizzy turns down
Mr. Collins, and the advice
of her mother, because she
wants to roll the dice again.
Of course, that ends up
very nicely, ultimately,
with Mr. Darcy, but,
at the time, she didn't
know.
PAUL SOLMAN: No, Lizzy was
lucky in love and money.
She accepted the risk.
But most others didn't.
MIHIR DESAI: The next day,
he gives the same proposal to
Charlotte, her friend, and she
takes it.
ACTOR: Cousin Elizabeth,
you can see before you
the happiest of men.
PAUL SOLMAN: Charlotte
Lucas' lot wasn't the
happiest, but better than
penury, one imagines.
MIHIR DESAI: She said, I'm just
going to take the solution.
PAUL SOLMAN: In Anthony
Trollope "Phineas Finn":
ACTOR: How nice to find
you and to find you alone.
PAUL SOLMAN: Violet Effingham
had a very different
problem: too many suitors.
ACTRESS: And you
look very piratical
tonight, Lord Chiltern.
ACTOR: That is because you see
me by the side of all these
smug, glossy parliament men.
MIHIR DESAI: She doesn't know
who to choose, and she says,
you know, if only I could marry
all 10.
You know, she's the
essence of diversification.
PAUL SOLMAN: Because then
you wouldn't have all
your eggs in one basket.
You would have 10 different
guys, 10 different fortunes.
MIHIR DESAI: Exactly.
The intuition that you
can lower risk by dividing
resources is extremely old.
That diversification idea goes
back to shipping, when you split
up your cargo across routes.
It goes back to agriculture,
when people would
split up their land.
In Ecclesiastes, we see
the advice to invest in
seven ventures -- no,
eight ventures, because
you never know what
disaster will happen.
PAUL SOLMAN: So this is
the benign face of finance.
It allows you to protect against
risk by, among other things,
diversifying your investments.
But then there's
the dark face again.
When you invest, you're still
stuck with the risk of giving
your money to someone else.
MIHIR DESAI: I gave my
money to Tim Cook, who runs
Apple, and I own one share.
Here's the problem.
I can't watch Tim Cook.
So the underlying problem
becomes, well, wait a second,
how do I monitor that guy?
How do I watch that guy?
How do I make sure he's
doing the right thing for me?
PAUL SOLMAN: This is the
principal-agent problem.
The principal is the
shareholder, who has the wealth.
The agent is the manager
entrusted with it.
ACTOR: If you only know
what I went through for you.
PAUL SOLMAN: And principals
and agents can have conflicting
interests, in the case of
"The Producers,"
extremely conflicting.
GENE WILDER, Actor:
It's absolutely amazing
that, under the right
circumstances, a producer
could make more money with a
flop than he could with a hit.
MIHIR DESAI: The essence of "The
Producers" is that these two
folks, Bialystock and Bloom,
want to rip off a bunch of
investors, and by creating a
flop, the investors won't want
their money back.
They raised 25000 percent
of what they actually need.
They create this -- what they
think is going to be a flop,
"Springtime For Hitler," and,
of course, it becomes a
hit, and they go to jail.
These investors trusted
Bialystock and Bloom.
They couldn't
actually monitor them.
They turned out to be bad eggs.
That is the problem
with capital markets.
That is the problem with me
giving money to people and not
knowing what they end up doing.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, of course,
for every Bialystock,
there's a Buffett, for
every Bernie Madoff,
1,000 honest brokers,
because there have always
been two faces of finance.
MIHIR DESAI: This is actually
my favorite book about finance.
It's from 1688.
PAUL SOLMAN: Yes, a
good year for finance.
MIHIR DESAI: And it was
"Confusion de Confusiones."
He basically describes finance
as the most noble profession,
as well as the most notorious
profession.
I think we have lost sense
of the nobility part that he
describes, and we tend to focus
on the negative.
PAUL SOLMAN: Desai, wanting
to accentuate the positive,
uses an exemplar of finance
from Willa Cather's 19th
century novel, "O Pioneers!"
MIHIR DESAI: Alexandra
Bergson is this wonderful
character who is a farmer,
who starts by basically
doing a leveraged buyout of
farms near where she lives.
PAUL SOLMAN: She borrows
money in order to buy.
MIHIR DESAI: She borrows
a bunch of money to
buy all of these farms.
ACTRESS: Now, I
have figured it out.
We sell most of the cattle e
and the corn we have left over.
We buy the Lindstrom place.
Then we take out two loans
on our half-section and
buy Peter Crow's place.
MIHIR DESAI: She ends up
engaging in transactions
that would be in any
finance textbook.
But she never loses
sight of who she is.
She never behaves in ways that
would suggest that she thinks
everything is due to her skill,
as opposed to luck.
She's very conscious of and
very humble of her outcome.
ACTOR: You have worked wonders
with this land, Alexandra.
ACTRESS: Oh, we hadn't any of
us much to do with it, Carl.
The land did it.
MIHIR DESAI: We really need good
stories about finance, because
good stories will guide good
behavior.
PAUL SOLMAN: It's a lesson Desai
tries to teach his students.
MIHIR DESAI: Pick your stories
carefully, because you will
live your life by these stories.
Some of you might
pick Gordon Gekko.
I don't recommend it.
Alexandra Bergson is
a fantastic model.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the
"PBS NewsHour," this is
economics correspondent
Paul Solman reporting
from Boston.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Who knew
by watching all these
films that you could get
great economic advice?
So, while writing his book,
Professor Desai says he was
surprised to discover how many
great writers, painters
and musicians also
held jobs in finance.
You can test your own knowledge
of these entrepreneurial
artists with our online
quiz at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now to
another in our Brief
But Spectacular series,
where we ask people to
describe their passions.
Tonight, we hear from
British activist and
attorney Alexander McLean.
He is the founder of the
Ugandan-based African
Prisons Project, which
seeks to improve the
lives of people
imprisoned in Africa.
ALEXANDER MCLEAN, Founder,
African Prisons Project: I
think that, with any of us, if
the world knew the thing about
us we are most ashamed of,
and that's all that they knew,
and that's all that they were
interested in, society would
lose out, because each of us
has much more to offer than
the worst thing we have done.
I have been working in prisons
in Uganda since I was 18,
spending a lot of time on death
row, growing up with many
of the death row inmates.
They have become
like family to me.
I have spent time in about 130
prisons all over the world.
I have seen that they're filled
with people who are poor and
not educated, and not connected.
When I was 19, I first
visited the women's prison
in Kampala, Uganda's capital.
That's where many women
were on death row.
Often, they were there
for killing a husband.
Uganda has some of the highest
rates of domestic violence in
the world, and, sometimes, when
a woman fights back, she will
find herself on death row.
That time I met Susan, she
was sentenced to death for
killing her husband when she was
21.
She shared her cell
designed for one person
with three other women.
She started a
school on death row.
She established a choir.
She was a lead in
the prison church.
I saw that Susan was
transforming her community
from the inside out.
The African Prisons Project got
her admitted into the University
of London in 2011 to study
for a law degree by
correspondence, as Nelson
Mandela had done from
prison in South Africa.
So,Susan was one of the
University of London's best
students in human rights law.
She established a legal aid
clinic in her prison, helping
scores of her fellow inmates
to be released from prison.
She led a case, Susan Kigula
and 417 others, where all of
the death row inmates in Uganda
challenged the mandatory
death sentence for
murder and armed robbery.
As a result of this case,
Susan and hundreds of others
were released from death row.
She's now completed
her law degree.
Uganda's most senior
judge invited her to apply
to join the judiciary.
She said: I won't, and now I'm
going to train women in prison
in the law, so they can use
the law to protect their
families and their communities.
We're in the process of
establishing the world's first
prison-based law college.
We're then going to establish a
prison-based law firm, through
which they provide services
to their peers.
We have seen about 3,000 people
released from prison in Uganda
and Kenya, having accessed
legal services from
prisoners and prison
staff we have trained.
The law is seen as
a profession for the
privileged, for the elite.
We want to change that thinking.
We recognize that, actually, the
law is here to serve all of us.
We want to see people getting
out of prison, becoming lawyers
and judges, and politicians,
and legal academics, and
business leaders, going from the
margins of society to the center
of it.
My name is Alexander McLean.
This is my Brief But Spectacular
take on the power of the law
in the hands of the poor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
can watch more Brief But
Spectacular videos on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
And now to a "NewsHour" shares,
something that caught our
eye, that might be of interest
to you, too.
Navy teams around the globe
are often called in to
assist in rescue efforts.
But, this week, one
maritime mission in the
Indian Ocean helped a
unique creature in need.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia
Griffin explains.
JULIA GRIFFIN: It was a routine
patrol for a Sri Lankan naval
team Tuesday morning, when
they spotted something unusual
bobbing among the ocean waves,
not a bird or a boat, but
rather a fully grown Asian
elephant, struggling to stay
afloat nearly 10 miles offshore.
Elephants are some of the
best swimmers of land mammals,
thanks to buoyant bodies and
trunks that can be
used as snorkels, but
this pachyderm appeared
fatigued and distressed.
Officials believe the
animal had been trying
to cross the Kokkilai
Lagoon off the country's
northeast coast when it
was swept out to sea.
Deciding to intervene, the
Navy and Department of Wildlife
dispatched additional teams to
the area, initiating a
mammoth-sized rescue effort.
The divers plunged
into the salty water to
soothe the elephant and
loop a tow rope around
its body.
Over the next 12 hours, they
gently towed Jumbo, as it was
affectionately dubbed, back
to the Sri Lankan coast.
And as day turned to
night, rescue teams
reached their destination,
releasing Jumbo exhausted
but alive into
the shallow water.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Julia Griffin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
a happy ending.
And who knew that
elephants could swim?
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: "NewsHour" producer David
Coles was working as a bartender
in Greenwich Village on July 13,
1977, when a massive electrical
blackout struck New York
City and lasted 25 hours.
On the 40th anniversary,
Dave shares his memories
of those two days.
You can read that and more on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Friday: the final episode of
our Inside Russia series before
the weekend, and my review
of the week with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.